snigdhāṃ mugdhāṃ satatamapi tāṃ lālayan satyabhāmāṃ
yāto bhūya: saha khalu tayā yājñasenīvivāham |
pārthaprītyai punarapi manāgāsthito hastipuryāṃ
saśakraprasthaṃ puramapi vibho saṃvidhāyāgato'bhū: ||1||
snigdhāṃ mugdhāṃ	loving and very beautiful
statam-api	for some time also
tāṃ lālayan	her endearing
satyabhāmāṃ	Satyabhaamaa
yāta: bhūya:	(Thou) went, thereafter
saha khalu tayā	with indeed her
yājñasenī-vivāham	to Paanchaali's marriage
pārtha-prītyai	for the Pandavaa's pleasure
puna:-api	again also
manāk-āsthita:	for sometime stayed
hastipuryām	in Hastinaapur
śakraprastham puram-api	Indraprastha city also
vibho saṃvidhāya-	O Lord! Founding
āgata:-abhū:	returned
Thou always endeared the loving and very beautiful Satyabhaamaa. Thereafter Thou went with her to attend the wedding of Paanchaali. To please the Paandavaas, Thou stayed in Hastinaapur for sometime. O Lord! Thou then founded the city of Indraprastha and then returned to Dwaarikaa.
bhadrāṃ bhadrāṃ bhavadavarajāṃ kauraveṇārthyamānāṃ
tvadvācā tāmahṛta kuhanāmaskarī śakrasūnu: |
tatra kruddhaṃ balamanunayan pratyagāstena sārdhaṃ
śakraprasthaṃ priyasakhamude satyabhāmāsahāya: ||2||
bhadrāṃ bhadrāṃ	the virtuous Subhadraa
bhavat-avarajāṃ	Thy younger sister
kauraveṇa-arthyamānām	by the Kaurava (Duryodhana) sought (in marriage)
tvat-vācā	by Thy words
tām-ahṛta	her carried away
kuhanā-maskarī	as a false sanyaasi
śakrasūnu:	Indra's son Arjun
tatra kruddham balam-	there, enraged Balaraama
anunayan pratyagā:-	pacifying (Thou) went
tena sārdham	with him
śakraprastham	to Indraprastha
priya-sakha-mude	for dear friend's pleasure
satyabhāmā-sahāya:	along with Satyabhaamaa
Thy younger sister, the virtuous Subhadraa was sought in marriage by the Kuru prince Duryodhana. She was carried away by Indra's son Arjuna in the guise of an ascetic at Thy behest. Balaraama was enraged at this but was later pacified by Thee. Thou then went with him and Satyabhaamaa to Indraprastha to the great delight of Thy dear friend Arjuna.
tatra krīḍannapi ca yamunākūladṛṣṭāṃ gṛhītvā
tāṃ kālindīṃ nagaramagama: khāṇḍavaprīṇitāgni: |
bhrātṛtrastāṃ praṇayavivaśāṃ deva paitṛṣvaseyīṃ
rājñāṃ madhye sapadi jahṛṣe mitravindāmavantīm ||3||
tatra krīḍan-api ca	there sporting even and
yamunā-kūla-dṛṣṭāṃ	on Yamuna's bank seen
gṛhītvā tāṃ kālindīm	taking that Kaalindi
nagaram-agama:	to the city (Thou) went
khāṇḍava-prīṇita-agni:	by the khandava forest pleasing the fire god
bhrātṛ-trastām	of her brother afraid
praṇaya-vivaśām	in love (for Thee) helpless
deva paitṛṣvaseyīṃ	O Lord! Thy father's sisters's daughter
rājñāṃ madhye	from among the kings
sapadi jahṛṣe	quickly took away
mitravindām-avantīm	Mitravindaa, the princess of Avanti
Even as Thou sported there, Thou saw Kaalindi on the banks of the river Yamuna and took her as Thy wife. Thou pleased the god of fire, Agni by letting him consume the Khaandava forest, and then returned to the city of Dwaarika. The princess of Avanti, Mitravindaa was the daughter of Thy father's sister and was greatly in love with Thee. She was afraid of her brother and was helpless. Thou took her away suddenly in the presence of many kings.
satyāṃ gatvā punarudavaho nagnajinnandanāṃ tāṃ
badhvā saptāpi ca vṛṣavarān saptamūrtirnimeṣāt |
bhadrāṃ nāma pradaduratha te deva santardanādyā-
statsodaryā varada bhavata: sā'pi paitṛṣvaseyī ||4||
satyāṃ gatvā	Satya, going to
puna:-udavaha:	again Thou married (Satya)
nagnajit-nandanāṃ tāṃ	Nagnajit's daughter her
badhvā sapta-api	harnessing seven even
ca vṛṣa-varān	and bull's powerful
sapta-mūrti:-nimeṣāt	by seven forms assuming
bhadrāṃ nāma	Bhadraa by name
pradadu:-atha	gave then
te deva	to Thee O Lord!
santardana-ādyā:-	by Santardana and other
tat-sodryā:	of her brothers
varada bhavata:	O Bestower of Boons! To Thee
sā-api paitṛṣvaseyī	she also was Thy father's sister's daughter
Thou then went to Kausala and married the king Nagnajit's daughter after demonstrating Thy strength by harnessing seven powerful bulls simultaneously assuming seven forms. O Lord! Bhadraa's brothers Santardana and others gave her to Thee in marriage. O Bestower of Boons! she was also the daughter of Thy father's sister.
pārthādyairapyakṛtalavanaṃ toyamātrābhilakṣyaṃ
lakṣaṃ chitvā śapharamavṛthā lakṣmaṇāṃ madrakanyām |
aṣṭāvevaṃ tava samabhavan vallabhāstatra madhye
śuśrotha tvaṃ surapatigirā bhaumaduśceṣṭitāni ||5||
pārtha-ādyai:-api	by Arjuna and others also
akṛta-lavanaṃ	not pierced through
toya-mātra-abhilakṣyaṃ	in water alone reflected
lakṣaṃ chitvā	the target, piercing
śapharam-avṛthā	of a fish, married
lakṣmaṇāṃ mandrakanyām	Lakshmanaa, the daughter of the king of Madra
aṣṭau-evam	eight, in this manner
tava samabhavan	Thy became
vallabhā:-tatra	wives, there also
madhye śuśrutha	between all this, (Thou) heard
tvaṃ surapati-girā	Thou by Indra's words
bhauma-duṣṭaceṣṭitāni	Bhauma's evil deeds
The target which was just a reflection of a fish in the water was not hit at even by Arjuna and the others. Striking which Thou married Lakshmanaa who was the daughter of the king of Madra. In this manner Thou had eight wives. Thou then came to know about the misdeeds of Bhauma from Indra's words.
smṛtāyātaṃ pakṣipravaramadhirūḍhastvamagamo
vahannaṅke bhāmāmupavanamivārātibhavanam |
vibhindan durgāṇi truṭitapṛtanāśoṇitarasai:
puraṃ tāvat prāgjyotiṣamakuruthā: śoṇitapuram ||6||
smṛta-āyātaṃ	(as and when) remembered, coming
pakṣipravaram-	the divine bird (Garuda)
adhirūḍha:-tvam-agama:	riding on him Thou went
vahan-aṅke	carrying on Thy lap
bhāmām-upavanam-iva-	Satyabhaamaa, in a garden as if
arāti-bhavanam	in the enemy's residence
vibhindan durgāṇi	destroying its fortification
truṭita-pṛtanā-	slaughtering the army
śoṇita-rasai:	(with its) blood liquid
puraṃ tāvat	that city then
prāgjyotiṣam-	Praagjyotisha
akuruthā:	made into
śoṇitapuram	Shonitpura
Thou rode with Satyabhaamaa on Thy lap riding the divine bird Garuda, who came to Thee as and when required and remembered. Thou went to the residence of the enemy as if Thou were going to a garden. After destroying the fortification of the city of Praagjyotish, Thou killed the army and made the blood run all over the city. Thou soon converted the city of Praagjyotish into Shonitpura (the city of blood).
murastvāṃ pañcāsyo jaladhivanamadhyādudapatat
sa cakre cakreṇa pradalitaśirā maṅkṣu bhavatā |
caturdantairdantāvalapatibhirindhānasamaraṃ
rathāṅgena chitvā narakamakarostīrṇanarakam ||7||
mura:-tvāṃ	(the Asura) Mura (to) Thee
pañca-āsya:	the five faced one
jaladhi-vana-madhyāt-	from the middle of the ocean like forest
udapatat	rushed
sa cakre cakreṇa	he was made by the discus
pradalita-śirā	cut off heads
maṅkṣu bhavatā	at once by Thee
catu:-dantai:-	by the four tusked
dantāvalapatibhi:-	mighty elephants
indhāna-samaraṃ	giving tough and protracted fight
rathāṅgena chitvā	with Thy discus severing
narakam-akaro:-	to Narakaasur made
tīrṇa-narakam	pass over hell
The Asura Mura having five faces rushed towards Thee from the middle of the forest which was like an ocean. He was at once made headless by Thy discus cutting off his five heads. Then Narakaasura with his regiment of mighty four tusked elephants gave a prolonged tough fight. Thou cut off his head also and made him pass over hell (and saved him from the suffering of hell).
stuto bhūmyā rājyaṃ sapadi bhagadatte'sya tanaye
gajañcaikaṃ datvā prajighayitha nāgānnijapurīm |
khalenābaddhānāṃ svagatamanasāṃ ṣoḍaśa puna:
sahasrāṇi strīṇāmapi ca dhanarāśiṃ ca vipulaṃ ||8||
stuta: bhūmyā	hymns sung (to Thee) by Bhoomi Devi
rājyaṃ sapadi	the kingdom at once
bhagadatte-asya tanaye	to Bhagadatta his son
gajam-ca-ekaṃ	and elephant one
datvā prajaghayitha	gave and sent away
nāgān-nija-purīm	the elephants to Thy city
khalena-ābaddhānām	by the wicked (Narakaasura) imprisoned
svagata-manasāṃ	whose minds were devoted to Thee
ṣoḍaśa puna: sahasrāṇi	sixteen again thousand (16000)
strīṇām-api ca	women also and
dhana-rāśiṃ ca vipulaṃ	wealth of great amount
Bhumi Devi sang hymns in Thy praise. Thou at once gave the kingdom and an elephant to Narakaasur's son Bhagadatta. The rest of the elephants Thou sent away to Dwaarikaa along with a good amount of wealth. Thou also sent the 16000 women who nourished love for Thee, and were imprisoned by the wicked Narakaasura.
bhaumāpāhṛtakuṇḍalaṃ tadaditerdātuṃ prayāto divaṃ
śakrādyairmahita: samaṃ dayitayā dyustrīṣu dattahriyā |
hṛtvā kalpataruṃ ruṣābhipatitaṃ jitvendramabhyāgama-
stattu śrīmadadoṣa īdṛśa iti vyākhyātumevākṛthā: ||9||
bhauma-apāhṛta-kuṇḍalaṃ	by Bhauma taken away the earrings
tat-adite:-dātuṃ	that to Aditi to give
prayāta: divam	went to the heaven
śakra-ādyai:-mahita:	by Indra and others honoured
samaṃ dayitayā	with (Thy) wife
dyu-strīṣu	the women of the heaven
dtta-hriyā	putting to shame
hṛtvā kalpatarum	taking away the Kalpataru
ruṣā-abhipatitaṃ	in anger having attacked
jitvā-indram-	winning over Indra
abhyāgama:-	returned
tat-tu śrī-mada-doṣa	that indeed is prosperity caused arrogance
īdṛśa iti	comes to this
vyākhyātum-eva-akṛthā:	demonstrate only (Thou) did
To give back to Aditi the ear ornaments which were taken away by Narakaasura, Thou went to the heaven. Satyabhaamaa had accompanied Thee who put to shame the women there, with her beauty. Thou were received with honour by Indra and others. Thou took away the Kalpataru, at which, the angered Indra put up a fight. Thou won over him and returned to Thy city. Thou did this to demonstrate to the world the evil which is generated from prosperity.
kalpadruṃ satyabhāmābhavanabhuvi sṛjan dvyaṣṭasāhasrayoṣā:
svīkṛtya pratyagāraṃ vihitabahuvapurlālayan kelibhedai: |
āścaryānnāradālokitavividhagatistatra tatrāpi gehe
bhūya: sarvāsu kurvan daśa daśa tanayān pāhi vātālayeśa ||10||
kalpadruṃ	the Kalpa tree
satyabhāmā-bhavana-bhuvi	in Satyabhaamaa's palace courtyard
sṛjan	planting
dvya-aṣṭa-sāhasra-	twice eight thousand
yoṣā: svīkṛtya	women accepting
prati-āgāraṃ	in every house
vihita-bahu-vapu:-	taking on many forms
lālayan kelibhedai:	nurturing with various activities
āścaryāt-nārada-	surprisingly by Naarada
ālokita-vividha-gati:-	seen (in) different activities engaged
tatra tatra-api gehe	in each of those houses
bhūya: sarvāsu kurvan	again to all of them giving
dśa daśa tanayān	ten sons each
pāhi vātālayeśa	save O Lord of Guruvaayur!
Thou planted the Kalpa tree in the courtyard of Satyabhaamaa's palace. The 16000 women were accepted by Thee as wives. Thou took on as many forms and engaged Thyself in each of those houses of these wives in various activities and lovingly nurtured them. Naarada was surprised to see Thee sporting in this manner. Thou then gave each of them ten sons. O Lord of Guruvaayur save me.